Title: Meet TPR’s Editorial Team
Author: No Author Info

Meet our Editors, Editorial Board, and Graduate Student Reviewers!EditorsRebecca Hallman –University of HoustonRebecca Hallman is a Ph.D. candidate in Rhetoric, Composition, and Pedagogy at the University of Houston and an IWCA board member in her second term as the Graduate Student Representative. She has been committed to writing center work since she started as a peer tutor in the Transylvania University Writing Center ten years ago. Her research and teaching interests include writing centers/WPA, curriculum design, qualitative methods/methodologies, writing in the disciplines, and teaching writing in online and multimodal environments. Her scholarly work has appeared or is forthcoming inPraxis: A Writing Center Journal, Writing and Composing in the Age of MOOCsandRAD Writing Center Research. She recently received the 2014 International Writing Center Association’s President’s Future Leaders Scholarship and the 2015 Moores Professors and Teaching Excellence Award at the University of Houston.Sherry Wynn Perdue –Oakland UniversityBefore helping to launchTPR, Sherry edited such diverse publications asRe-Visions: Journal of the Women’s Studies Program at Michigan State University,The Oil Pipeline Monitor,andThe Oakland Journal.She currently directs the writing center at  Oakland University, where she also teaches rhetoric and composition. As an outgrowth of her WC role, she serves on the boards of MiWCA, ECWCA, and IWCA. Her research, published inWCJ,WLN,Perspectives on Undergraduate Research and Mentoring, andEducational Libraries, addresses writing center research methodologies, institutional support for dissertation writers, and undergraduate research. With Dana Lynn Driscoll,  she was awarded IWCA’s 2012 Outstanding Article Award for “Theory, Lore, and More: An Analysis of RAD Research inThe Writing Center Journal, 1980-2009.” Renovating her mid century home, walking her standard poodle Max, and embarrassing her teenage daughter occupy her fleeting spare time.Editorial BoardRusty Carpenter –Eastern Kentucky UniversityRussell Carpenter is the Director of the Noel Studio for Academic Creativity and Program Director for Applied Creative Thinking at Eastern Kentucky University, where he is also Associate Professor of English. Carpenter co-editedThe Routledge Reader on Writing Centers and New Media(with Sohui Lee) andCases on Higher Education Spaces. He is President of the Southeastern Writing Center Association and Past Chair of the National Association of Communication Centers.Dana Driscoll –Indiana University of PennsylvaniaDana is Associate Professor of English at Indiana University of Pennsylvania where she teaches in the Composition and TESSOL Ph.D. program and mentors new teachers of writing. Her research interests include RAD research in writing centers, writing transfer, writing dispositions and metacognition, research methods, writing assessment, writing programs, service learning, and writing across the curriculum. She has published inComputers and Composition, The Writing Center Journal,Across the Disciplines,Writing Program Administration, Assessing Writing,Teaching and Learning Inquiry,andComposition Forum. She is a Co-PI on a grant-funded, multi-institutional research project, the “The Writing Transfer Project” which seeks to understand transfer of learning and metacognition in diverse settings. Her co-authored work, “Theory, Lore, and More: An Analysis of RAD Research in the Writing Center Journal, 1980-2009,” won the IWCA’s 2012 Outstanding Article of the Year Award.Alexis Hart –Alleghenty CollegeAlexis Hart is Associate Professor of English and Director of Writing at Allegheny College, a small, liberal arts college (SLAC) in Northwestern Pennsylvania. In her role as a professor, Hart teaches first-year seminars and introduction to literature courses. As Director of Writing, she supervises and conducts professional development for the undergraduate peer writing consultants and collaborates closely with the Director of Speaking to design and deliver faculty development related to writing, reading, speaking, and listening. Her scholarly interests range from undergraduate research to veterans studies, and her scholarly work includes editingHow to Start an Undergraduate Research Journalfor the Council on Undergraduate Research, guest editing special issues ofKairosandComposition Forum, and a number of co-authored book chapters and journal articles.  She serves as the co-chair of the CCCC Task Force on Veterans and as the NCTE/CCCC policy analyst for higher education in Pennsylvania.Andrew Jetter –Niles West High SchoolAndrew Jeter is the Research Director of the Idea Lab and is working to complete his dissertation, which extends the work of the PWTARP into the high school context. He also teaches English composition and literature at Niles West High School and was the Director of the Literacy Center there from 2005 to 2013. He is currently the President of the Chicagoland Organization of Writing, Literacy, and Learning Centers (COWLLC); a member of the Steering Committee for the National Conference on Peer Tutoring in Writing; and an At-Large Executive Board Member of the IWCA.Steve Price –Mississippi CollegeSteve Price is a co-editor ofThe Writing Center Journaland an associate professor at Mississippi College, where he also directs the writing center. When he is not editing or working in the center, he teaches courses in research methodology and discourse analysis.Lindsay Sabatino –University of North Carolina, GreensboroLindsay Sabatino is the Director of the Digital ACT studio and co-director of The Multiliteracy Centers at University of North Carolina at Greensboro. Dr. Sabatino also serves as an At-Large Representative for the International Writing Center Association. Her research focuses on writing centers, multimodal composition, technology, digital literacies, and the teaching of writing. Her work has been published in theComputers and Composition, International Journal of Innovation in English Language Teaching and Research, WLNandPraxis: A Writing Center Journal.Trixie Smith –Michigan State UniversityTrixie Smith is the Director of The Writing Center and a member of the faculty in Rhetoric & Writing as well as the Center for Gender in Global Contexts at Michigan State University. After joining the faculty at MSU in 2007, she has hosted the East Central Writing Center Association and presently serves as the ECWCA Treasurer. Her teaching and research are infused with issues of gender and activism even as they revolve around writing center theory and practice, writing across the curriculum, writing pedagogy, and teacher training. Likewise these areas often intersect with interests in pop culture, service learning, and the idea that we’re just humans learning with/from other humans (you know, with bodies, feelings, lives outside the academy). Recent publications includeBridges to Writing(Fountainhead Press, 2014 with Allison Smith),The Pop Culture Zone: Writing Critically About Popular Culture, 2 ed (Cengage, 2014, with Allison Smith) and articles inWorking with Faculty Writers(Eds. Geller and Eodice, Utah State UP, 2013),WAC Partnerships Among Secondary and Post-Secondary Institutions(forthcoming), andThe Pleasures of Identity: Living Queer(forthcoming). She also is co-editing a special issue ofAcross the Disciplinesfocused on graduate writing (Spring 2014).Graduate Student ReviewersBrenta Blevins –University of North Carolina, GreensboroBrenta Blevins is a Ph.D. student in English at The University of North Carolina at Greensboro studying rhetoric and composition with a specialization in digital rhetoric. Her research interests include online pedagogy, digital genres, digital literacy, and multiliteracy centers. She has served as Graduate Assistant Director of the UNCG Writing Center, Assistant Director of the UNCG Digital ACT Studio, and Fellow with the Sweetland Digital Rhetoric Collaborative (http://www.digitalrhetoriccollaborative.org/).Mirabeth Braude –Michigan State UniversityMirabeth Braude is a M.A. student in Writing, Rhetoric, and American Cultures at Michigan State University. She is majoring in Critical Studies in Literacy and Pedagogy. Currently, she is a teaching assistant for MSU’s first year writing course,The Evolution of American Thought, a Writing Center Workshop Coordinator Trainee, a Writing Center Consultant, a HASTAC Scholars Coordinator, and from time to time a freelance writer for Capital Gains Media in Lansing, MI. Her previous areas of research were ways for Embedded Specialists to work ESL students and students with Writing Anxiety, Working with Students with Learning, Emotional, Behavioral Disorders in Writing Centers, Adults Continuing Education in Writing Centers, The Rhetorics of Cultures and National Anthems. She is currently interested in the intersection between happiness studies and education, culture, writing/ rhetoric.Ashley Cerku –Oakland UniversityAshley Cerku is the Operations Coordinator at the Oakland University Writing Center. She received her B.A. in English and Writing/Rhetoric from Oakland University and is currently a graduate student in the Liberal Studies program. Ashley discusses “The Art and Rhetoric of Letter Writing: Preserving Rhetorical Strategies Throughout Time” in her recent publication inYoung Scholars in Writing. In her free time, she likes to ride her horse and hitch up her three miniature horses to a cart.Ezekiel Choffele –Syracuse UniversityEzekiel is a first year PHD student in the Composition and Cultural Rhetoric program at Syracuse University. He previously worked at the Writing Center at Michigan State University for 5 years and is engaged in the larger Writing Center community through workshops and conference presentations. His research interests include: Decolonial theory and WC applications, WC administration and assesment, and undergraduate and graduate WC training.Sophie Gourgiotis –University of Southern FloridaSophie is a 2nd year M.A. student in Rhetoric and Composition at the University of South Florida. She received a B.A. in Ft. Lauderdale at Nova Southeastern University. Currently, her research interests include technical writing, visual rhetoric, writing center studies, and gender studies.Kelsey Hixson-Bowles –Indiana University of PennsylvaniaKelsey Hixson-Bowles is currently a Ph.D. candidate in the Composition and TESOL program at Indiana University of Pennsylvania (IUP) as well as the Graduate Assistant Director of the IUP Writing Center. Her research interests include writing center pedagogy, RAD research, institutional structures of writing centers, and social justice in the writing center and composition classroom.Patricia Medved –St. John’s UniversityPatricia is a Doctoral Fellow at St. John’s University where she teaches First Year Writing and takes courses in composition theory, literacy, issues in writing studies, literature and whatever else suits her interests (and schedule and requirements!). She soon will move on to more serious matters of research and writing for her dissertation. Though the exact nature of that investigation has yet to be determined, it will involve looking at the ways collaboration and metacognition serve idea generation or invention. In a previous (extended) chapter of her life, Patricia was a trade book editor at several NY publishing houses, including HarperCollins, Simon and Schuster and Random House. She earned her M.A. in Professional Writing and Rhetoric from the University of Texas, El Paso. She wishes she could read more but keeps taking on careers for people who love to read!Enrique Paz –Miami UniversityEnrique Paz pursues a Ph.D. in composition and rhetoric at Miami University while performing administrative work at Miami’s Howe Writing Center. In addition to his interests on authorship and plagiarism, his writing center research examines the physical constructions of writing center space and undergraduate consultant training, development, and research.Roger Powell –Indiana University of PennsylvaniaIn addition to his work as a graduate student reviewer forThe Peer Review, Roger is a Ph.D. candidate in the Composition and TESOL program at Indiana University of Pennsylvania. Roger also currently serves as the IUP Online Writing Center Coordinator. His research interests include: Transfer of Learning, Genre Theory, Writing Centers, Online Writing Centers, WPA, WAC, RAD Research, and Undergraduate/Graduate Mentorship. When Roger finds some spare time, he enjoys reading for fun, watching sports and cheering on the Kansas City Chiefs and Kansas City Royals, playing video games, watching Netflix, and traveling.Michael Reich –St. John’s UniversityMichael Reich is a doctoral candidate who has studied composition with Professors Harry Denny, Anne Geller, and Derek Owens. His interests include writing centers, collaboration, invention, mentorship, and feedback. His first published article, a review of recent writing center scholarship co-written with Harry Denny and Cara Messina, will be available fromComposition Studiesin the upcoming monthsStacy Rice –University of North Carolina, GreensboroStacy is a doctoral candidate at UNC-Greensboro, where she studies the intersections of mass media, political rhetoric, and war.She has served as Assistant Director of UNCG’s Digital ACT Studio, where she had the privilege of training consultants to work in a multimodal peer consulting environment. Before that, she worked at Eastern Kentucky University’s Noel Studio for Academic Creativity, and it was here she discovered her interest in digital and visual rhetoric. When she’s not working on her dissertation or teaching, Stacy enjoys doing yoga, drinking coffee, and spending time with her husband and cats.Undergraduate Student ReviewersAndrew Petrykowski –Oakland UniversityAndrew Petrykowski is a consultant at the Oakland University Writing Center. He has worked at the Center since late 2012, helping students of all levels to develop their scholarly identity and to improve their writing processes. He is currently working towards a B.A. degree in Writing and Rhetoric, after which he intends to apply for admission to a graduate program in Rhetoric and Composition. Andrew serves as a research assistant for a study of writing center administrator job advertisements, which he will present along with his coauthors at IWCA 2015. Andrew lives in Sterling Heights, Michigan, with his rescue kitten, Rex.