Title: Reflection: Morgan Banville, Graduate Co-Editor
Author: No Author Info

Morgan Banville, East Carolina UniversityDear Writing Center Community andTPRreaders,My name is Morgan Banville and I am a second-year PhD student in Rhetoric, Writing, and Professional Communication at East Carolina University. I am transitioning into the role as Graduate Co-Editor ofThe Peer Reviewwhile also serving as an active member of the editorial team for the upcoming special issue, “Researching and Restoring Justice in Writing Centers.” During my time as one of the special issue editors/reviewers, we provided feedback regardless of acceptance to every single author, becoming agents in understanding the process of creating a special issue from the ground up. This special issue (to be released Fall 2020) encourages submissions that amplify the work and profiles of tutors, graduate students, and emergent scholars, as well as women, people of color, translingual speakers, and those identifying with other groups underrepresented within the discipline, specifically. I hope to continue this work and look forward to collaborating and learning from all who submit toTPR.In order to align withThe Peer Review’smission to promote the work of emerging writing center researchers, the journal will continue to advocate for collaborative work, social justice, and diversity within writing center studies. As a Graduate Co-Editor, it is necessary to be able to reflect upon how community members have diverse bodies, experiences, and needs. It is therefore important to critique and counteract both individual and structural oppression to create a safer, more just community.I’d like to thankYanarfor his contributions to the journal, as well as reiterate one of his many important points: as administrators, consultants, writers, editors, etc, we must continue to develop our practices along axes of racial justice. As the journal continues its journey, it is the expectation that as Co-Editor, I will continue to educate myself about and accept submissions regarding systems of oppression and marginalization in an attempt to foster conversation and community learning around those topics, while also developing professional and academic practices that proactively respond to the needs of historically marginalized communities and individuals.My status as a white, cisgender graduate student affords privileges that many do not have. In this position, I have the ability not to speak for groups, but to act as an agent in amplifying the messages and work that is underrepresented in the discipline. As a first-generation student, I empathize with the fears emerging scholars may have, as I too experience what many call “imposter syndrome.” I am particularly interested in promoting research that involves awareness and understanding of trauma, research that supports mental health and writing centers, and research that responds to and engages with current events. Whether you are a sole author, or are one of few names on a manuscript submission, know that you are not alone and have a team of editors and reviewers that have your back.Thank you and happy writing!Morgan Banville