Title: Dyslexia in the Writing Center: Multimodal Strategies
Author: No Author Info

Sarah Murphy, University of Massachusetts DartmouthAbstractThisarticleis meant to serve as apracticalguide forwriting center practitioners and providestrategies to help make writing centers more accessible for all learners. These strategies specifically focus on ways to increase accessibility for dyslexicindividuals, regardless ofwhetherthewriter hasdisclosed their disability or not.IntroductionOne challenge that writing centersshould confront more explicitlyis how to navigateworking withand providing resources fordisabledindividuals.In my experiences as a tutor, students often do not disclose their disability/disabilitiesuntil we haveestablished significant rapport andmet for multiple sessions. Even then, once tuteestell me they have a diagnosed learningdisability, they donotalways share the specifics of their disabilitieswith me.KerriRinaldi(2015), a deaf writing center consultant,argues that disclosingwhat type of disability a person has is not necessary. She writes “My disability does not impact my knowledge of myself. I will tell you what I need, and you don’t need to know my disability so that you can make that decision for me.”I agree withRinaldihere that tutors do not need to knowastudent’s specific diagnosisor disability to still have a successful session.For example, I have been working regularly with one student for about two years who informed me after our first few sessions that she has both physical and learning disabilities. While she never specified which disabilitiesshe has, she did communicate that she needs a quiet place to concentrate;it is helpful when I read documents out loud to her;and that she has difficulty with handwriting so it is best if we type notes. Knowing which strategies work best for her proved to be significantly beneficial to our sessions.It can be difficult to tell exactly how many students in college, let alone the writing center, have learning disabilitiessince “it isestimated that only half of college students report their disabilities, and many foregoaccommodations for fear that they will be treateddifferentlyby their instructors and peers” (Hitt, 2012).Disclosing a learningdisabilityis a personal and individual decision.If up to half ofdisabled studentsare not comfortable sharing that information with their universities, it is likely that an equal orhigher percentage of students are not comfortable disclosing theirdisabilitiesto their tutors.Effectivewriting center practice, however, means beingable to balancewriters’preferences while fostering an inclusive environment,regardless of theirabilities.Brief Literature Review:Disability as Identityand Universal DesignWhen I first began thisarticle, my younger brother was applying to college. He was diagnosed with dyslexia in the seventh grade and was placed on an IEP (Individualized Education Plan) that seriously helped improve his academic performance. While his IEP gave him the focus and attention he needed to be at grade level, I worried about how he would manage the reading and writing college demands. It made me think critically about how I, as a writing tutor, could help someone with dyslexia like my brother.Dyslexia is defined as “difficulties in various aspects of writing skills making the individual unable to develop age-appropriate and ability appropriate functional skills.” (Tariq and Latif, 2016, p. 151). Difficulties can occur in everything from handwriting to differentiating letters. However, dyslexiadoesnot affect general intelligence. It is likely that a student with dyslexia may not disclose that information, and it is not appropriate for the tutor to assume or ask. Assuming or asking a student about potential learning disabilities crosses a boundary that may make them uncomfortable and damage rapport.Mybrother’s experiences,as well as the lack ofaccessible, practicalresources on approaching dyslexia in a writing center space,contributed to my desire to write this article.I wish I had a guide like this one when I was training to become a tutor that gave an overview of disabilities in the writing center with specific techniques that may be beneficial.While manystudentsknow which techniques help them best, I believe it is important for tutors to have as many strategies to pull from incase the session hits a roadblock. It isessential, however, toalsoprovide some background on this topic from scholars working in both writing centers and disability studies.Tutors can best balance students’ preferences by being adaptive and open–minded.Individualsexperience their disabilities differentlyand so there cannot bejustone way to tutor disabled students.It isveryimportantto acknowledge that many people whowork inand use the writing center, including faculty, administrators,and tutors, might also be themselves disabled. Asone suchconsultantRinaldi (2015)offers acriticalperspective within this conversation. Shediscusses the danger of following a specific procedure when working with disabled students. This approach treats the student’s disability “as an obstacle or shortcoming instead of a contributor to her agency.” When tutors view disabilities as something that must be“fixed,”it shifts the power into the hands of the tutor.Rinaldi calls for writing centers to“refuse to treat sessions with disabled students as different, and if we refuse to consider students with disabilities as outside the bounds of normality, then we refuse to uphold the social construction of disability as a problem to be fixed.”Instead of seeing disability as something that needs to beaddressedbefore thesession can begin, tutors should focus on disability as anaspect of a person’sidentityrather than a difference.Karen Nakamura(2018)extends this conversation by focusing onthe intersectionality between race and disability.She mentions how there is very little study on disability and race, but that racecan havea significant impact on a person’s disability. An example Nakamuracitescomes from Wanda Blanchett who talks about the “disproportionate representation of African-American students in special education…They’re being labeled with particular labels that don’t get them services while being prevented from being labeled appropriately in ways that might actually get them services that they might actually be able to use.” Institutional racism often prevents non-white students from being correctly diagnosed and receiving theappropriateservices for their needs. Race is just one example of the many types of identitiesindividualsembody. However, it is important to consider how a student’s race, gender, sexuality, religion,etc. might impact how they view their disabilityand what role these identitiesmight play within a writing center space.As individualsworking in writing centers, we should be aware that our language choices matter and this absolutely extends to how we choose to refer to disabled people.The specific language with which we use to discuss disability iscontingent uponhow and the extent to which a person chooses to identify. Many see “person-first language” (PFL) as thepreferableway to talk about disability.With PFL, we would refer to tutees as “a tutee with disabilities”as itacknowledges their humanityfirst. However, disabled scholars have challenged PFL as the only way to talk about disability. Some prefer to use “identity first language” (IFL) because they see their disability as an important aspect of their person.With IFL we would refer to tutees as “a disabled tutee.”ForEmilyLadau(2015), her disability is not only a fact of her life, but it is a source of pride.WhileLadauprefers IFL, she does note that each person has a different relationship with their disability and some people still prefer PFL. Therefore, in a tutoring session, if a student discloses their disability to their tutor, the tutor should ask how the tutee chooses to identify, PFL or IFL, to ensure the student is comfortable during the session.It has become increasingly more common to ask people how they prefer to identify(e.g., requesting or making visible preferredpronouns)and so writing centers should work to incorporatesimilarpracticeswhen working withanindividualwhohas chosen to disclose their disability.Usinglanguagethe student is comfortable with is only one of the ways tutoring appointments can be adapted to fit the needs of disabled students. A tutoring appointment should ultimately be a conversation between equals, although it is the tutor’s responsibility to create a way for the tutor and tutee to effectively interact. Rinaldi (2015)claims that writing centers cling to this idea that wehave toaccommodate disabled students. While this practice is well–intentioned, it inherently treats disabled students as different. My goal in creating this guide for tutors is to help break away from the “accommodation model” Rinaldi refers to. The simple fact is that every student who visits the writing center is different. Therefore, there is no one right way to tutor because different strategies may or may not be helpful for different students. This guide is meant to providewriting centerswith multiple strategies that can be adapted to all tutoring appointments based on thewriting center user’spreferences.Myarticleaims to utilize principles ofuniversal design thatJeanKiedaischandSueDinitz(2007)advocate for. Universal design is not the same as a one-size-fits-all approachbecause itassumesindividualswill come to thewriting center with a wide range of abilities and needs.Itis an adaptable and flexible approach with “design principles for conducting all sessions that make them accessible to the widest audience possible” (p. 51). Adopting a universal design approach to tutoring can help fit a broad range of students.A universal design can be especially helpful because there are countless forms of learningdisabilitiesand it would bevery difficultto coverstrategies forthem all.Every student, even those withoutdisabilities, stillhashighly individualized learning preferences. Tutors need toadaptsessions to how the student works best; different strategies may be more helpful to some students than others.Many of the suggestionsI discuss in thisarticlecan be useful for assisting students with a variety of disabilities and learning preferences. While I specifically focus on strategies for tutees who may or may not disclose as dyslexic, according toRebeccaBabcock(2015),many of these same strategies, such astheuse of visuals, use of computers/computer programs, enhanced tutor training, tape recording sessions, and reading out loud, can be beneficial for students with disabilities including deafness, visual impairment, dyslexia, and those with multiple disabilities. In addition to making the writing center more accessibleto all disabled individuals who use the center, the following strategies may also be beneficial to visual and auditory learners. Therefore, I am proposing that tutors work to include these strategies in their sessions because they have the potential to make our centers more accessible to not only dyslexicindividualsbut also to students with a variety of learning styles and preferences.Multimodal StrategiesIncorporating Listening StrategiesLeslieAnglesey andMaureenMcBride(2019) arguethattutors must actively listen to the needs of the tutee.The key to accommodating all students is “focusing on listening practices that are inclusive to all individuals…thus helping us make our centers usable for all”Anglesey and McBride refer to this type of listening aslistening to shelterwhich they define as“the process of providing shelter to another person’s ideas.” In other words, they are challenging tutors to listen to understand, rather than listening to respond. It is unlikely a student will walk into a tutoringappointment and immediately begin explaining what conditions they work best in. Therefore, it is important to ask questions about a student’spreferencesand then actively listen to their response.What I am describing here in this piece are ways for tutors to respond as an active listener by drawing on resources that can help make writing centers more accessible because listening to students’ preferences and needs helps keep the session running smoothly. This can be especially helpful for students withboth disclosed andundisclosed learning disabilitiesbecause tutors can, by listening actively, learnadaptivestrategies.Babcock (2015) contributes to this conversation of asking and listening to students’ preferences. She cites a survey JenniferWewersconducted in whichWewersinterviewed an unidentified number of writing tutors and five dyslexic students. Her findings showed that many writing tutors are misinformed on the specifics of dyslexia.Misconceptions about disability can negatively impact a tutoring session, especially since Babcock found most tutors’ misconceptions came from “folk knowledge gleaned from the media, most of it stereotypical and unscientific such as dyslexics switch letters around when reading.” It is important to combat these stereotypesin the writing centerbecause dyslexiaismuch more than simply switching letters around when reading or writing.Dyslexic individuals may have difficulty with decoding words, organization, lateness, and handwriting mechanics.Based on her interviews with dyslexic students,Wewerssuggested that tutors be flexible to students’ needs.In order fortutors to ensure they do not accidentally contribute their own interpretations or misconceptions about a student’s disability, tutors should ask thestudent questionsthat will help guide the session.The following questions can be incorporated into the beginning of every session regardless of if the student has disclosed a disability or not. Tutors may consider asking any variation of these questions:What part of the assignment do you want to focus on?Where in our space would you most prefer to work?What tools or technologies do you tend to use most frequently when you write?Are you comfortable reading your paper out loud or would you prefer if I read it?How do you learn best (i.e. Do you learn best by doing, seeing, or hearing)?What are your goals for our session?In addition to this short list, there are many other questions tutors may wish to ask at the start of the session. Taking a few minutes at the start of the appointment to ask a student about their preferences and then actively listen to their responses can ensure that both the tutor and tutee have the same expectations for a productive session.Technologiesand TechniquesTechnologies canmake it easier for writing centers to be accommodating to all students’ needs, includingindividualswith dyslexia. Centersshouldincorporate, and train tutorstouse,a variety of technologiesto increase accessibility—in other words, to encouragetutors to developmultiliterate practices. Multiliteracyis a broad term that includesdeveloping awareness ofmore thansimple black and white text on a page. Multiliteracies are “an opportunity to move beyond the dominating limitations of print- and word-based literacies, to reach other modes of representation such as visual, aural, gestural, spatial, and multimodal” (Hitt, 2012).Individualswith dyslexia may find print and word–based sources inaccessible, but withincreasedattention tomultiliteracies, writing centers can helpmorestudents access academia inways they might not have previously been exposed to.Thefollowingmultimodaltechniques, drawn from psychology and educationto assistdyslexic students,couldalsobe incorporated intoand useful forsessionswithdiversetypes of learners.1. Let theStudentChoose theFontFor an appointment to run smoothly, tutees should have their paper formatted how they work best.If it appears that a student may be struggling with their paper based on its format, tutors can suggest that tutees change the font, color, or size of the words.For example, I was recently working with a student who had to respond to a discussion board. The assignment requiredherto write a response to an articlesheread and thencomment on two classmates’posts.When she opened another student’s post, the font wastiny,and she was squinting to read it. I suggested she copy and pastethe post into a word document and make the font larger.Once she was comfortable with the formatting, we were able to read the post and craft a response.Suggestions like thesemay help a student who never considered reformatting their work in a less traditional manner, beyond justusing default word-processer fonts.Afterwards, the tutee can easily switch the fontbackto the designated requirements.While it is appropriate to use anyfontthe student feels comfortable with, studies show that certain font typesareeasier fordyslexic peopleto work with. Generally, a sans-serif font group in black ink is best, with a fourteen to sixteen-point font size (Tariq and Latif, 2016).There arealsofree online programsthatwill change a text to a more readable fontfor dyslexic people. One of these programs,OpenDyslexic, created a typefacespecifically for dyslexia.On their website, they describe theOpenDyslexicfont type: “OpenDyslexicis not supposed to be a cure, a complete solution, or something you should apply uniformly to everyone: it was intended to address: contrast/blindness, letter confusion or rotation, and crowding (open dyslexic website).”OpenDyslexicis modeled after the font Dyslexie, which was designed to negate many of the problems with traditional fonts because “typical effects of dyslexia – the mirroring, swapping, rotating and crowding of letters – are only enhanced and magnified by most fonts” (King, 2018). Unfortunately, neitherOpenDyslexicnor Dyslexie are available in Word. The closest font style Word has is Comic Sans, which is generally–though perhaps wrongly—oftenseen as an“unprofessional”font choice. Writing centers maythen consider havingOpenDyslexicpre-downloaded on their computers so students can work with this fontand then convert their work to their professors’guidelines.Manyprofessors require the final product be set up in Times New Roman, twelve-point font. This is a small, serif font whichmaymake it more difficult to work with.In addition to font,the color of the paper impacts its readability.White, light pink and light green colored paperarethe easiest to readfrom(Tariq and Latif, 2016).Writing centersshould consider having colored paper to assist students who need it.Any available handouts should also be printed on these colors so that all students can access them equally.The tutee should work under the best conditions for their own productivity and this will vary for each student.For some students,this may simply include moving into a quieter room and for others,it can be reformatting theentirepaper. In either case, tutors can understand tutees’preferencesbyasking andlistening to the tuteeto ensuretheir comfortability with their current working conditions.It is equally as necessary for tutors to work in conditions they are comfortable with themselves. This may be especially true for disabled tutors. Tutors are as diverse as the tutees who use our centers. However, asValleset al.(2017) point out, there are no comprehensive reports on tutor diversity acrossuniversities as a whole. I know in my own center, we have a diverse staff in terms of race, sexuality, religion,and disability. In order to address this diversity among tutoring staff, it is important for writing centers to have a variety of resources to not only make their centers more accessible to tutees, but also for tutors. Disabled tutorsmay choose touse many of these same strategies to help them with their job. For example, a dyslexic tutor may wish to temporarily change the font of a paper if they are having difficultyreading it in the original format (although they should be aware that they may need to explain to the tutee why they are changing the format).2. AvoidHandwritingHandwritten wordsare oftenchallenging formany readers tounderstand:everything from incongruous letters to sloppy style can make it difficult for readers to decipher handwriting.InTariq and Latif’s piece, they cite Martínez-Marrero and Estrada-Hernández (2008) who“indicated that dyslexic children often experience difficulties in mechanical aspects (letter formation, capitalization, spelling and punctuation) as well as contextual aspects (organization and consistency) of writing”(151). While this source explores handwriting in children, I have worked with adults who also have difficulty with the mechanics of handwriting.Other disabilities, such as dysgraphia and ADHD, may alsoresult indifficultiesprocessinghandwriting(Adi-Japhaet al.,2007).The writing center should,therefore,try to make computers consistently available, so students always have the option to type.Notes can be typed on the tutee’s computer,aGoogleDoc, or other easy to share file. If typing is not an option, the next best format is print handwriting (Tariq and Latif, 2016). Tutors should avoid cursive because the loopy style is difficult to read.Another effective alternative for note taking isthrough the use ofa tape recorder(Babcock, 2015).Tutees may choose to record their sessions on their phone or another device. This strategycan be beneficial because it allows tutees to go back and hear exactly what was discussed in the session.In the event thata student, or tutor, wishes to record their session, both the App Store and Google Play have multiple free tape recorder appsthat tutors should be aware of.Quicktimewhich is built intoorcan be downloaded to many computers allows users to record, edit, and share audio and video files. Writing centers can make sure this program is downloaded on their computers and that tutors are trained to use it.The App Storealsohas a free Voice Recorder & Audio editor app available for iPhone and iPad. This app allows for an unlimited number of recordings provided that the device has enough storage. The advantagesofthis apparethatthe user can organize their recordings into multiple folders,and it has a feature that will transcribe audio recordings using speech recognition software. For Android devices, the Google Play Store has the app Voice Recorder. While this app does not have the ability to transcribe recordings, it has the other benefits of untimed, high–quality recording sessions. It is important for tutors to be aware that recording sessions, with both the consent of tutor and tutee, may provide students with a beneficial alternative to traditional note taking on the computer or by hand.However, if the student feels comfortable writing, they should handwrite the information themselves intheabsence of a computer. This ensures that the tutee takes notes in a readable format while avoiding accidental plagiarism.It’salso important to let the student write suggestions so they avoid confusion when going back to read notes from the session.While these are good practices for any session because it allows the student to think for themselves, it will be especially helpful for a student with dyslexia when theyreferto their notes.3. ReadingOutLoudIt iscommon practicein writing centersfor either the tutor or tutee to reada writer’sassignment out loud.Having the tutor read an assignment out loudcanhelp adyslexic studentbecause they can internalize their work in a new way(Tariq& Latif, 2016).Some writing centers, however,require tutors to encourageevery writertoread theirown workout loud. While tutors can suggest students read their papers, itis worthwhile considering the ways thatrequiringthat all students read their own paper aloudcan be inaccessible.One-size fits all approaches like this can make some students uncomfortable in our centers. Forcing a student with dyslexia to read their paper out loud may be very difficult for the student and they are less likely to benefit from this practice.Withthe student’s consent,Igenerallyreadthe writers’ workout loud in my sessions. I believe it is beneficial for all students because, in my experience,tuteesare more likely to catch and fixtheir mistakeswhen they hear their paper.For example, I will often have students stop me while I am reading and say something along the lines of “that sentence doesn’t make sense. What if I said this instead?” or “that’snot really what I meant to say. WhatI’mtrying to say here is…” Reading out loud is also a great way to be responsive to the students’ needs. I will start off a session by asking the student what they want to work on. If they tell me they want to make sure their paper is organized, I will tell themto focus on the organization and flow while I am reading.Thisalsohelps keep thestudent engaged during the session because they are actively following along.There are many technologies that can simulate reading out loud as well. These are known as text-to-speech software, whicharevaluable toolsto help anyone with reading difficultiesorwho prefers to process content aurally. Itisbeneficial fordyslexic tuteesbecause it allows them to read the text in front of them while simultaneously hearing it spoken. Platforms that read documents aloud increase reading accuracy in people with dyslexia (Woolf, 2013). Some of the best freetext-to-speech programs areBalabolka, Natural Reader(has dyslexic font), andWordTalk.Balabolkais a downloadable program that works with a variety of file types. It has customizable font and background colors so students can set the text to their preferences.Balabolkaalso has a setting in which students can save their text and audio files as MP3 which will allow them to refer to the text once the session has ended.Natural Readeris an online program that does not need to be downloaded to the computer. Files can be pasted, typed, and edited within their text box.Natural Reader comes with several different voices so students can choose which voice works best for their understanding.The free version of Natural Reader provides unlimited use of their Free Voices and up to 20 minutes a day of their premium voices. There are payment options that allow for more features, but the free version willstillread any text aloud. NaturalReader also has afont optionspecifically for individuals with dyslexiaso students can select to work with a fontsimilar toOpenDyslexicand Dyslexie.Finally,WordTalkis a free text-to-speech plugin for Microsoft Word. Writing centers can downloadWordTalkto their computers so students working with Microsoft Word documents canhear their papers out loud.WordTalkwill create a spoken version of the document and read it back while highlighting the words.This isusefulto help students follow along with the spoken words.Writing centerscan haveany combination oftheseprograms available for students to use during a session.Hearing documents or webpages out loudcan be helpful todyslexicindividualsas well as anypersonthatmight benefit from having material read out loud.4. MultimediaIfan assignment permits students to utilize multimodal resources(audio, visual, text, images, etc.), students canhave the opportunity toprocessinformationin ways that traditional “print” sources often do not permit. Liketext-to-speech, multimedia stimulates different parts of the brain whichcan bebeneficial fordyslexic individuals. A student with dyslexiamay havedifficulty absorbing information through reading and then relaying what they know through writing. Multimedia sources have been shown to “get individuals’ attention, improve their understanding and boost their confidence” (Tariq and Latif,2016, p.153).If a student comes to an appointment to brainstorm for a paper, the tutor may suggestreferring tomultimedia sources such as audiobooks, videos, podcasts, pictures, etc. This way, the student can find more about their topicwithout having to rely purely on written sources.For someone with dyslexia, consuming information presented through different platforms may makecertain aspects of their topic more accessible.It can also make the research stage of a paper more enjoyable and engagingbecause students have a variety of sources to look at. Many students may even berequiredto include videos or podcasts into their research in addition to more traditional sources like articles and journals. Additionally,somewriting centersmight alsoneed to be prepared to assist students withmultimodal projects like PowerPoints, presentations, and video projectsbecause theyare becoming more common.Writingcentersshouldconsequentlyincorporate multimedia sources in their spaces because it increases accessibility to information and education fordisabled students(Hitt, 2012).Conclusion:Incorporating theseTools intoPracticeMy goal in writing thisarticlewas to create an easily applicable guide for tutors. In my own training, I wished I had something like this to apply to mytutoring practice. Therefore, I specifically sought out techniques that can be incorporated intomanysessions, andmight even be helpful for tutors in their own writing processes as well.Inaddition to this guide, I created avideowhich discusses and showcases many of the programs and strategies I mention.Within the introduction to this video,I mistakenly refer to disabled students as students with learning differences.Throughout the process of writing this article, I have become more aware of disability studies and the language we should use to talk aboutdisabilities:I have been introduced to scholarship that fully explains the implications ofdifferently–abledlanguage. Although it was not my intention,differently–abledlanguage and other euphemisms marginalize disabled people and imply that disability is an offensive word when,in reality, itissomething that millions of people navigateon a daily basis.The video, and transcript, are posted on YouTube for accessibility.Most of the techniques in this paperand videocan be beneficial for all students while being especially useful fordyslexicindividuals.Dyslexia can go undetected because itprimarilyimpacts a person’s ability to read and write.Along with this, many students are hesitant to disclose any learning disabilities because they fear being treated differently.Thewriting centercanstill be accessibleto these studentswiththese practices.It’stheresponsibility of thewriting centerto beasinclusive and helpful for all studentsas possible.Tutors should use these tips because they have the potential to help students withdisclosed and undisclosed disabilities.Directors should also ensure their tutors are properly trained toincorporatethese strategiesandadvocate for any programs or technologies thatcan bevital to ensuring accessibility.I hope this piece can serve as a training tool forwriting centersto develop their flexibilityand explore thesestrategiesand technologiesas they can be helpful for anyone who visits or uses the center. The best way to be accommodating to all students is to listen to their needs and preferences.These strategies can make the writing center accessible to students with disabilitieswhile also staying within the appropriate boundaries between tutor and tutee.Ultimately, there needs to be more research conducted on disabilities in the writing center. As Babcock (2015)notes, there are few articles on the most common types of disabilities among college students.Fosteringmore research, especially from disabled tutors and tutees themselves, will help writing centers become more accessible. When we listen to the needs of disabled individuals, we allow ourselves to challengeour preconceivedideas aboutdisabilitieswhich can transform how werespond toall users ofour centers.ReferencesAdi-Japha, E., Landau, Y. E., Frenkel, L.Teicher, M.,Tsur, V. G., & Shalev, R. S. (2007). ADHD and dysgraphia: Underlying mechanisms.Cortex, 43(6), 700-709.https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-9452(08)70499-4.Anglesey, L.,&McBride, M.(2019).Caring forstudents withdisabilities: (Re)definingwelcome as aculture oflistening.The PeerReview(3).http://thepeerreviewiwca.org/issues/redefining-welcome/caring-for-students-with-disabilities-redefining-welcome-asa-culture-of-listening/Babcock, R. D.(2015).Disabilities in the writing center.Praxis: A WritingCenter Journal,13(1).http://www.praxisuwc.com/babcock-131Hitt, A.(2012).Access forall: Therole ofdis/ability inmultiliteracycenters.Praxis: A Writing Center Journal,(2). Retrieved fromhttp://www.praxisuwc.com/hitt-92Kiedaisch, J., & Dinitz, S. (2007). Changing notions of difference in the writing center: The possibilities of universal design.The Writing Center Journal,27(2), 39-59. http://www.jstor.org/stable/43442271King, S. (2018). “Sir! it works!”: Thedyslexiefont.The SchoolLibrarian,66(2), 72-74.http://libproxy.umassd.edu/login?url=https://search-proquest-com.libproxy.umassd.edu/docview/2056860250?accountid=14573Ladau, E.(2015, July 20).Why person-first languagedoesn’talways putthe person first. Think inclusive.https://www.thinkinclusive.us/why-person-first-language-doesnt-always-put-the-person-first/Nakamura, K. (2018, February 16). Karen Nakamura speaks on disabilitystudies and race [Video]. YouTube.https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0b7PXCYK79A&feature=emb_logoRinaldi, K. (2015). Disability in the writing center: A new approach (that’snot so new).Praxis: A Writing Center Journal,13(1),http://www.praxisuwc.com/rinaldi-131.Tariq, R., &Latif, S.(2016).Amobileapplication toimprovelearningperformance ofdyslexicchildren withwritingdifficulties.Educational Technology & Society,(4).Retrieved fromhttps://www.researchgate.net/publication/310773732_A_Mobile_Application_to_Improve_Learning_Performance_of_Dyslexic_Children_with_Writing_DifficultiesValles, S. B. Babcock, R. D. & Jackson, K.K. (2017). Writing centeradministrators and diversity: A survey.The Peer Review, 1(1)http://thepeerreview-iwca.org/issues/issue-%201/writing-center-administrators-and-diversity-a-%20survey/Woolf, C. M. (2013). Lit-fitchallengeaudiobooksproject.NationalAssociation of School Psychologists,(8). Retrieved fromhttps://search-proquest-com.libproxy.umassd.edu/docview/ 1412863471?rfr_id=info%3Axri%2Fsid%3Aprimo