Title: Conversation Shapers
Author: No Author Info

TPRis currently accepting submission for a new publication type: Conversation Shapers. Conversation Shapers are projects that work to shape future writing center research. Conversation Shapers include a curated bibliography on a single, focused writing center topic such as but not limited to: Linguistic Justice in the Writing Center, Social Justice in Online Centers, Anti-Racist Tutoring Training, Accessibility in the Center, Tutor Labor Conditions, Director Labor Conditions. Conversation Shapers should have an overarching equity and inclusive theme to them and amplify scholarship authored by Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC). A Conversation Shaper submission should include a 500-word framing statement that introduces the topic, its connection to equity and inclusion, and summarizes the bibliography. Following the framing statement, the bibliography should be formatted in APA and include 20-25 sources. While sources can be from related fields of study, at least half of the sources should be writing center scholarship. Following the bibliography should be a “where we’d like the field to go” section. In this field shaping section, authors should offer research questions or scholarship that they’d like to read. Preference will be given to undergraduate and graduate tutors to author reading lists. If professionals are interested in submitting a Conversation Shaper, we encourage you to collaborate with a tutor.If interested in authoring a Conversation Shaper, please submit a one-paragraph proposal to theTRPEditorial Team that details your theme. TheTRPEditorial team will review all proposals. Accepted proposals will be assigned to a member of theTRPcommunity—one of the editors or another expert in the field of Writing Center Studies—who will mentor the author through the curation of their submission and then send the list out for review.Conversation Shapers will be published with General Issues and may be published ahead of print when Special Issues are being published.